# Summary of definitions and theorems in graph theory

## Trees

### 4.1 Bridges

An edge $e=uv$ of a connected graph $G$ is called a **bridge** of $G$ if $G-e$ is disconnected.

An edge $e$ is a **bridge** of a disconnected graph if $e$ is a bridge of some component of $G$.

An edge $e$ is a bridge of a graph $G$ if and only if $k(G-e)=k(G)+1$

End-vertice: vertice with degree $1$.

**Theorem 4.1**: *An edge $e$ of a graph $G$ is a bridge if and only if $e$ lies on no cycle of $G$* 

### 4.2 Trees

A graph G is called **acyclic** if it has no cycles.

A **tree** is an acyclic connected graph.

Every edge in a tree is a bridge.

A tree containing exactly two vertices that are not end-vertices(which are necessarily adjacent) is called a **double star**.

A **caterpillar** is a tree of order 3 or more, the removal of whose end-vertices produces a path called **spine** of the caterpillar.

Choose a vertex of a tree $T$, and designate this vertex as the **root** of $T$. The tree $T$ then becomes a **rooted tree**. 

Acyclic graphs are also referred to as *forests**. Therefore each component of a forest is a tree.

The one fact that distinguishes trees from forests is that a tree is required to be connected, while a forest is not required to be connected.

**Theorem 4.2** *A graph $G$ is a tree if and only if every two vertices of G are connected by a unique path*.

**Theorem 4.3** *Every nontrivial tree has at least two end-vertices*.

**Theorem 4.4** *Every tree of order n has size $n-1$*

**Corollary 4.6** *Every forest of order n with k components has size $n-k$*

**Theorem 4.7** *The size of every connected graph of order $n$ is at least $n-1$*.

**Theorem 4.8** *Let $G$ be a graph of order $n$ and size $m$. If $G$ satisfies any two of the properties: (1) $G$ is connected, (2)$G$ is acyclic, (3)$m=n-1$, then $G$ is a tree.*

**Theorem 4.9** *Let $T$ be a tree of order $k$. If $G$ is a graph with $\delta(G) \ge k-1$, then $T$ is isomorphic to some subgraph of $G$*

### 4.3 The Minimum Spanning Tree Problem

A spanning subgraph $H$ of a connected graph $G$ such that $H$ is a tree is called a **spanning tree** of $G$.

**Theorem 4.10** *Every connected graph contains a spanning tree*.

The **weight** $w(H)$ of $H$ is defined as the sum of the weights of its edges.

A spanning tree with the minimum weight is called a **minimum spanning tree**.

The problem of finding a minimum spanning tree in a connected weighted graph is called the **Minimum Spanning Tree Problem**. 

**Kruskal's Algorithm**: For a connected weighted graph $G$, a spanning tree $T$ of $G$ is constructed as follows: For the first edge $e_1$ of $T$, we select any edge of $G$ of minimum weight and for the second edge $e_2$ of $T$, we select any remaining edge of $G$ of minimum weight. For the thrid edge $e_3$ of T, we choose any remaining edge of $G$ of minimum weight that does not produce a cycle with the previously selected edges. We continue in the manner until a spanning tree is produced.

**Theorem 4.11** *Kruskal's Algorithm produces a minimum spanning tree in a connected weighted graph*.

**Prim's Algorithm**: For a connected weighted graph $G$, a spanning tree $T$ of $G$ is constructed as follows: For an arbitrary vertex $u$ for $G$, an edge of minimum weight incident with $u$ is selected as the first edge $e_1$ of $T$. For subsequent edges $e_2$, $e_3$,..,$e_{n-1}$, we select an edge of minimum weight among those edges having exactly one of its vertices incident with an edge already selected.

**Theorem 4.12** *Prim's Algorithm produces a minimum spanning tree in a connected weighted graph.*

### 4.4 Excursion: The Number of Spanning Trees

**THeorem 4.15** *The number of distinct trees of order n with a specified vertex set is $n^{n-2}$*.

**Matrix Tree Theorem**

Reference:

[1] G.Chartrand and P.Zhang, First Course in Graph Theory, New York: Dover Publications, 2012.


